This chapter introduces some essential instructions for transferring data and performing arithmetic. Shown is how to create loops, and use of some of the basic operators, such as `OFFSET`, `PTR`, and `LENGTHOF`.

**Previous Chapter**: [[3. Assembly Language Fundamentals]]

# 4.1 Data Transfer Instructions

A ***data transfer instruction*** copies data from a source operand to a destination operand. Assemblers let you do just about anything you want, as long as the processor's instruction set can do what you ask. Assembly language forces you to pay attention to data storage and machine-specific details. You must understand the processor's limitations when you write assembly code.

### Memory to Memory

A single `MOV` instruction cannot be used to move data directly from one memory location to another. Instead, you must move the source operand's value to a register before assigning its value to a memory operand:

```
.data
var1 WORD ?
var2 WORD ?
.code
mov ax, var1
mov var2, ax
```

### Overlapping Values

The following code example shows how the same 32-bit register can be modified using differently sized data.

```
.data
oneByte BYTE 78h
oneWord WORD 1234h
oneDword DWORD 12345678h
.code
mov eax, 0          ; EAX = 00000000h
mov al, oneByte     ; EAX = 00000078h
mov ax, oneWord     ; EAX = 00001234h
move eax, oneDword  ; EAX = 12345678h
mov ax, 0           ; EAX = 12340000h
```

## Zero / Sign Extension of Integers

### MOVZX Instruction

The `MOVZX` instruction (*move with zero-extend*) copies the contents of a source operand into a destination operand and zero-extends the value to 16 or 32 bits. The instruction is only used with *unsigned integers*.

### MOVSX Instruction

The `MOVSX` instruction (*move with sign-extend*) copies the contents of a source operand into the destination operand and sign-extends the value to 16 or 32 bits. This instruction is only used with *signed integers*.

### LAHF and SAHF Instructions

The `LAHF` (load status flags into AH) instructions copies the low byte of the EFLAGS register into AH. The following flags are copied: Sign, Zero, Auxiliary Carry, Parity, and Carry. Using this instruction, you can easily save a copy of the flags in a variable for safekeeping:

```
.data
saveFlags BYTE ?
.code lahf          ; load flags into AH
mov saveflags, ah   ; save them in a variable
```

The `SAHF` (store AH into status flags) instruction copies AH into the low byte of the EFLAGS (or RFLAGS) register. For example, you can retrieve the value of flags saved earlier in a variable:

```
mov ah, saveflags   ; load saved flags into AH
sahf                ; copy into flags register
```

### XCHG Instruction

The `XCHG` (exchange data) instruction exchanges the contents of two operands. There are three variants:

```
XCHG reg, reg
XCHG reg, mem
XCHG mem, reg
```

The rules for operands in the `XCHG` instruction are the same for those for the `MOV` instruction, except that `XCHG` does not accept ***immediate operands***. In array sorting applications, `XCHG` provides a simple way to exchange two array elements. Here are a few examples using `XCHG`:

```
xchg ax, bx    ; exchange 16-bit regs
xchg ah, al    ; exchange 8-bit regs
xchg var1, bx  ; exchange 16-bit mem op with BX
xchg eax, ebx  ; exchange 32-bit regs
```

To exchange two memory operands, use a register as a temporary container and combine `MOV` with `XCHG`:

```
mov  ax, val1
xchg ax, val2
mov  val1, ax
```

## Direct-Offset Operands

You can add a displacement to the name of a variable, creating a ***direct-offset operands***. This lets you access memory locations that may not have have explicit labels.

```
arrayB BYTE 10h, 20h, 30h, 40h, 50h
```

We can access the second byte in the array by adding 1 to the offset of `arrayB`:

```
mov al, [arrayB + 1]
```

An expression such as `arrayB + 1` produces what is called an ***effective address*** by adding an integer constant to the name of a data label. Surrounding an effective address with brackets makes it clear that the expression is dereferenced to obtain the contents of memory at the address. They are not required, but *should* be used for clarity.

Keep in mind that MASM has no built-in range checking for effective addresses, so you can easily retrieve a byte of memory from outside the array. Additionally, for non-`byte` arrays, the offsets must be multiples of however large one unit of the array is.

# 4.2 Addition and Subtraction

## INC and DEC Instructions

The `INC` (increment) and `DEC` (decrement) instructions, respectively, add 1 and subtract 1 from a register or memory operand. The syntax is 

```
INC reg/mem
DEC reg/mem
```

Here are some examples:

```
.data
myWord WORD 1000h
.code
inc myWord    ; myWord = 1001h
mov bx, myWord
dec bx        ; BX = 1000h
```

## ADD Instruction

The `ADD` instruction adds a source operand to a destination operand. The syntax is:

```
ADD dest, source
```

The source is unchanged and the sum is stored in the destination operand. The operand rules are the same for `ADD` as `MOV`.

## SUB Instruction

The `SUB` instruction subtracts a source operand from a destination operand. The set of possible operands is the same as for the `ADD` instruction. The syntax is:

```
SUB dest, source
```

The source is unchanged and the difference is stored in the destination operand. The operand rules are the same for `SUB` as `MOV`.

## NEG Instruction

The `NED` (negate) instruction reverses the sign of a number by converting the number to its two's complement. The following operands are permitted:

```
NEG reg
NEG mem
```

## Flags Affected by Addition and Subtraction

- The **Carry flag** indicates *unsigned* integer overflow.
- The **Overflow flag** indicates *signed* integer overflow.
- The **Zero flag** indicates that an operation produced zero.
- The **Sign flag** indicates that an operation produced a negative result.
- The **Parity flag** indicates whether or not an even number of 1 bits occurs in the least significant byte of the destination operand, immediately after an arithmetic or boolean instruction has been executed.
- The **Auxiliary Carry flag** is set when a 1 bit carries out of position 3 in the least significant byte of the destination operand.

### Unsigned Operations: Zero, Carry, and Auxiliary Carry

#### Zero Flag

The *Zero flag* is set when the result of an arithmetic operation equals zero.

```
mov ecx,1 
sub ecx,1            ; ECX = 0, ZF = 1 
mov eax,0FFFFFFFFh 
inc eax              ; EAX = 0, ZF = 1 
inc eax              ; EAX = 1, ZF = 0 
dec eax              ; EAX = 0, ZF = 1
```

#### Addition and the Carry Flag

When adding two unsigned integers, the *carry flag* is a copy of the carry out of the most significant bit of the destination operand.

```
mov al,0FFh 
add al,1            ; AL = 00, CF = 1
```

#### Subtraction and the Carry Flag

A subtract operation sets the *carry flag* when a larger unsigned integer is subtracted from a smaller one.

```
mov al,1 
sub al,2            ; AL = FFh, CF = 1
```

##### TIP
> The `INC` and `DEC` instruction do **not** affect the Carry flag. Applying the `NEG` instruction to nonzero operand *always* sets the Carry flag.

#### Auxiliary Carry

The *Auxiliary Carry flag* indicates a carry or borrow out of bit 3 in the destination operand. It is primarily used in [binary coded decimal](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Binary-coded_decimal) arithmetic.

```
mov al,0Fh 
add al,1         ; AC = 1

0 0 0 0 1 1 1 1
+ 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1
------------------
  0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0
```

