The latest version of *Microsoft Macro Assembler (known as MASM)* should be used for these notes. MASM is included with Microsoft *Visual Studio*.

*Assembly language* is the oldest programming language, and of all languages, bears the closest resemblance to native machine language. It provides direct access to computer hardware, requiring you to understand much about your computer's architecture and operation system.

# 1.1.1 Questions You Might Ask

## What are Assemblers and Linkers?

An ***assembler*** is a utility program that converts source code programs from assembly language into machine language. A ***linker*** is a utility program that combines individual files created by an assembler into a single executable program.

## What Hardware and Software Do I Need?

You need a computer that runs a 32-bit or 64-bit version of Microsoft Windows, along with one of the recent versions of Microsoft Visual Studio.

## What Types of Programs Can Be Created Using MASM?

- ***32-Bit Protected Mode***: these programs run under all 32-bit and 64-bit version of Microsoft Windows. They are usually easier to write and understand than real-mode programs. We will simply call this *32-bit mode*.
- ***64-Bit Mode***: these programs run under all 64-bit versions of Microsoft Windows.

## What Will I Learn?

- Basic principles of computer architecture as applied to x86 processors
- Basic Boolean logic and how it applies to programming and computer hardware
- How x86 processors manage memory, using protected mode and virtual mode
- How high-level languages compilers, such as C++, translate statements from their language into assembly language and native machine code
- How high-level languages implement arithmetic expressions, loops, and logical structures at the machine level